Motivation
===

Over the past few decades there has been an explosion of available data
for environmental and biodiversity research. This ‘big data’ now allows
us to address a number of old and new important questions with
unprecedented rigor and generality. Leveraging these new data streams
requires new tools and increasingly complex workflows.

The course will provide an overview of methods for addressing the
challenges of working in a Linux Environment, including command line and
scripting routines using open source software. Students will also learn
about multi-core computation on a local computer as well cluster
computation via remote servers. Scripting knowledge will be developed
step by step during the course, emphasising the concatenation process of
the different software. The course will have three sections: 1) Methods
and tools (Linux; command line scripting; GRASS; advanced R for
spatial/environmental data) 2) Example “big” datasets (environmental,
remote sensing, biodiversity) 3) Example questions, data integration and
modelling (data-model dichotomy, Bayesian approaches, addressing
uncertainty). At the end of the semester participants will have a basic
knowledge of the variety of open source tools that are available for
Geographic Information System (GIS), Remote Sensing (RS), and spatial
analysis and modelling. They will have worked through case studies from
forestry, species distribution modelling, biodiversity, conservation,
and remote sensing image processing.

Target audience of the course are students and postdocs with an interest
in advancing their data analysis and modelling skill-set and who have at
least basic understanding of statistics, remote sensing, and GIS (there
will be no emphasis on introductory concepts).
